So Goodfire is an AI interpretability
research company really trying to answer
the question of you know what's actually
going on inside the mind of a neural
net. Um so kind of the ultimate goal and
the ultimate uh reason why we started
everything was like uh we just see
neural networks kind of going into more
and more mission critical context and I
think it's going to be enormously
transformative for society but in order
to do so and you you want to uh build it
safely powerfully reliably and uh I
think like it's going to be critical to
be able to understand edit and debug AI
models in order to to do that and so
that's what we're kind of enabling for
for the very first time. It's like
unlocking the black box of a neural
network such that you can intentionally
design it rather than just kind of like
grow it from from data.
[Music]
What if we could crack open the black
box of AI and see exactly how it thinks?
Today, we're joined by Eric Hoe, the
founder of Goodfire, who's building
tools to peer inside neural nets and
understand their minds. Eric reveals how
his team has successfully disentangled
the mysterious phenomenon of superp
position, where single neurons encode
multiple concepts and can now steer AI
behavior with increasingly surgical
precision. We explore whether
interpretability could help us discover
new biological insights, edit out
harmful behaviors from large language
models, and even understand our own
brains better. Eric boldly predicts that
we'll fully decode neural nets by 2028,
transforming AI from black boxes into
more intentional design. Enjoy the show.
Eric, thank you so much for joining us
today.
Of course. Yeah, happy to be here.
Thanks for having me. First question,
can we ever trust generative AI if these
foundation models are very much black
boxes?
Can we ever trust them if they're black
boxes? Uh, so I guess like you know
maybe thinking about like um what would
happen if we were to just kind of deploy
AI models as black boxes like in
perpetuity. Um, so the blackbox way to
to do this would be like um and I'm I'm
kind of assuming that we're playing this
forward a few years and we want AI in
charge of like really mission critical
applications like um maybe being in
charge of our power grid or making big
investment decisions maybe even for a
seed investment at Sequoia or like a
really large you know like um million
dollar like investment decision. And I
think like the blackbox way to to make
sure that the AI is performing
appropriately is like you take a look at
evals and you run like a bunch of like
evaluations to make sure that it's
behaving behaving appropriately in test
sets and then you look at its track
record and see if it's like you know
reliable enough to perform across a wide
variety of things. And uh I think like
the question then is like why not take
all of this additional signal that you
get from looking inside a neural network
and trying to play forward like how it's
going to behave in a much wider broader
set of situations. Like why not like
look inside and actually like get a
bunch more uh reliability certainty
about how it's thinking, how it's
approaching the problem. And uh I think
like you're just leaving a bunch on the
table if you're not like looking for all
the signal that you can get. So the way
that I think about this is like I don't
know when you're manufacturing a new
drug. It's like you can do the blackbox
way of just like seeing how humans
respond to the drug in like a clinical
trial. Whereas like you could also just
like kind of look inside and like look
at biochemically like how the drug is um
uh processed or like uh drug
interactions uh at the molecular or
cellular cellular level. And uh yeah, I
just feel like there's so much to be
learned when you actually like look
inside and deeply understand something.
How possible do you think it is to look
inside and deeply understand a large
language model? Do you think it's a you
know on the scale from
hopeless we can't ever understand it.
It's just a black box. Too many too many
neurons to we can actually map out the
mind of a neural net. I'm curious where
you think the field will be.
Well, I'm I'm very biased, but I think
it's very very possible. Uh so I mean a
lot of the people in in mechan like come
from um backgrounds in like
computational neuroscience or like
cognitive science and uh those people
when you're like actually looking inside
the brain um you spend so much time like
trying to understand like what a single
neuron does or just getting any signal
whatsoever. Um and in the the field of
mechan you have perfect access to the
neurons the parameters the weights the
attention patterns of a a neural
network. So you're you're coming in with
a huge advantage for like uh at least
like you get all of the data that you
you need. So then the real question is
like how can we make progress? How can
we um try to understand and seek to
understand all of it? Uh and I think we
just got to try. I think it's deeply
necessary and critical for the future.
And we have like a norm established. you
can explain some percentage of the
network by reconstructing it and
extracting you know its concepts and the
features that it uses in order to
generate its response and once you have
at least a baseline un like rudimentary
understanding kind of where we're at
right now you can hill climb on that
metric and seek to understand like more
and more of the network do you think
it's going to be necessary for us to
understand neural nets to really harness
them long term because I think many
other technologies we've invented along
the way humans didn't really understand
underlying physics or chemistry But
still we were able to make good of
medicines or you know
totally
sort of basic propulsion techniques
without understanding you know all the
physics. Yeah, I think it's going to be
critical for the future just given how
transformative I think AI is going to to
be. Like I think AI is going to be
everywhere running mission critical um
parts of our society. And like we can
get really really far just by treating
AI as a black box, but I don't think we
can truly be able to intentionally
design AI as like the new generation of
software without like white box
techniques. So maybe one example I think
about is uh you know in the um early uh
17th century uh you invented like the
steam engine and we're able to just like
um increase the size of the boiler and
increase the amount of pressure going in
and it scaled reasonably well but steam
engines also like blew up like um well
we didn't understand thermodynamics at
that time. So we didn't actually know
like at what point did uh like the ideal
size of like the boiler or like the
ideal pressure the the ideal way to
construct a steam engine. And so like
after we invented thermodynamics like
things started becoming a lot safer, a
lot more reliable and like huge
innovations happened afterwards. But
already like you know the steam engine
kicked off like the industrial
revolution. So even just by like uh
treating it as a black box you get a
really long way.
Yeah. Do you think there's any chance
that if we understand neural networks in
a computer science context, it might
actually help us accelerate our
understanding of neuroscience for the
human brain? I think so. But uh that's
like that's a big claim I think. Uh so
like we were just having an interesting
conversation last night. Uh we had like
a dinner together um about like uh do we
um do we think in language? Do you think
in concepts or something else entirely?
Like I'm a person that doesn't really
think in language. I think much more
like conceptually maybe in like the
latent space of of models. Whereas like
our head of product Myra said that she
basically is totally faithful to her own
chain of thought like speaks in language
and she basically just thinks like
sequentially with like a really really
strong internal monologue. So like
maybe maybe some of these insights that
we get like will will translate to to
humans and our own psychology. And I
think that's the hope. It's like yeah
the more that we can understand about AI
like hopefully the more that we can
understand about ourselves.
There's an interesting analogy by the
way that in neuroscience often things
that have gone wrong help illuminate and
create insights into the human brain.
Yeah.
You know people who suffer from specific
conditions or people who suffered
particular brain injury types have
actually perversely enabled us to better
understand the brain accidentally. I
wonder if something similar might happen
with neural networks as Yeah, I hope so.
What What's that like uh popular story
about the guy who just like got an iron
rod through his his brain and it made
him like a totally different person?
Yeah.
Anyway,
yeah, there's also this uh you know to
add to that um there's this concept of
of universality where like um among
totally different neural networks like
similar kind of like circuits or like
thought patterns tend to emerge between
all these neural networks. So um like
even in um like we found in in vision
models like very similar uh kind of
circuits to our own like visual cortex.
Uh and I think like you know there
there's this like idea of universality
where maybe like intelligence is just
this like thing that you gradient
descent to and then like uh that's how
our brains found like intelligence and
that's how artificial minds would would
find intelligence um as well like
there's some truth to intelligence. My
own neural net is probably pretty
sparse.
It's pretty sparse.
Um, I would love to double click into
some of the results you've had from
meurf and the broader field and and your
lab, but before we get into it, can you
say a word about Goodfire and and what
you all are building?
Yeah, so so GoodFire is an AI
interpretability research company really
trying to answer the question of, you
know, what's actually going on inside
the mind of a neural net. Um so kind of
the ultimate goal and the ultimate uh
reason why we started everything was
like uh we just see neural networks kind
of going into more and more
missionritical contexts and I think it's
going to be enormously transformative
for society but in order to do so and
you you want to uh build it safely
powerfully reliably and uh I think like
it's going to be critical to be able to
understand edit and debug AI models in
order to to do that and so that's what
we're kind of enabling for for the very
first time. It's like unlocking the
black box of a neural network such that
you can intentionally design it rather
than just kind of like grow it from from
data.
And if everything goes right, what do
you think will be the impact that you
all have on the world?
Uh so maybe one one metaphor that we we
like and and think about is like yeah
right now like you just kind of like
grow AI from a seed and then it just
like grows like a a giant tree and it
grows all wild and crazy. right now we
don't know really know like kind of a
lot of the things that it's growing into
and all sorts of like interesting and
weird stuff can can happen with the
really large neural net but uh if
everything goes right with
interpretability we know like we'll know
every how every single piece of training
data affects like the cognition that the
model develops the um units of
computation that it uses and I almost
think of it more as like bonsai where
you want to kind of like intentionally
design and shape and grow the neural
network like still in an unsupervised
like AIdriven approach like we're we're
not going to hand prune every single
weight of a neural network but uh I
think we'll gain the ability to like
during every single piece of the
training post-training process like just
intentionally shape an AI model such
that it you know serves humanity and
does what we want
sounds like a parallel to the human
genome project in some sense yes given
some of the work I've done in genetics.
So there this idea that
we need to read DNA. We need to
understand the building blocks of life.
And then ultimately now we're starting
to edit DNA and use crisper to come up
with interesting cures for diseases or
an ability to edit crops to make them
more resistant to pesticides and things
like that. So it's just it's very
interesting parallel.
Yeah, definitely. No, I think we we
think about that, you know, analogy a
lot. And I know you had uh Patrick Shu
on the the podcast, you know, at some
point uh as well, and we're working with
him at Arc Institute to uh to yeah, like
crack the code of of the human genome as
well. And uh I think there's there's a
lot of really interesting parallels and
also direct applications of AI
interpretability um as well.
Would you go so far as actually making
edits? What I heard from you earlier,
the bonsai analogy was a little bit of a
shaping
um
which which is quite different in my
mind from editing. you know, shaping to
me might be, you know, train and be fit
so that your body can survive given a
certain DNA and then there's editing
which is altering the DNA. Uh, are you
going to do both?
Yeah, I think in short, yes. Uh I don't
know like what the So in Turpp as a
field like there's still a lot to figure
out and so it's still pretty um still
pretty new but I think in bonsai you
also prune a lot of branches and you
prune a lot of like the areas that you
don't want to grow such that you can
kind of shape the the overall tree to
like grow in the the pattern that you
want. So I think like you know the the
eventual system that we hope to build
like you can ask questions of the model
like why did you why did you come up
with this response and get a faithful
explanation while also being able to
make direct surgical interventions in
the mind of the model such that we can
remove harmful behavior enhance good
behavior. Um, and uh, still remains to
be seen whether like it's just like a
direct weights modification or like some
other like kind of shaping function that
um, is most effective.
If you think about the some of the ways
that people are trying to prune these
bonsai trees today, I think it's a lot
of prompt engineering, you know,
fine-tuning, RL tuning increasingly now.
What do you think about that as the
approach to kind of steer the behavior
of these models uh versus actually go in
and introspect and examine each of the
individual neurons?
Fundamentally like these are blackbox
things like all sorts of weird things
can happen when you like fine-tune a
model for example or like you know
prompt a model and take it out of
distribution and it can say all sorts of
crazy stuff. So, uh, the the paper
that's most interesting about this
recently, I don't know if you've you've
caught this, is this like emergent
misalignment, um, study, no? Okay, this
is like uh Owen Evans group um where if
you fine-tune a model on just insecure
code, so it's just like bad code that
you know has all sorts of like cyber
security vulnerabilities, it'll then
start doing all sorts of insane things
like telling like wanting to enslave
humanity or like praising Hitler and
other dictators. And it's a really
surprising result because it's just
insecure code. And so yeah, it kind of
shows that there's like um maybe like
what you're doing with fine-tuning is
you're telling the model like hey do
more of this, less of this, and like uh
almost like enhancing the circuits that
uh you want kind of more of, but you can
also have like all sorts of unintended
consequences like this um that that show
up. And these circuits, these are still
like really alien cognition. like
there's some parallels to humanity, but
we really don't understand how these
networks think and they're not like
human thinking. So if you enhance the
bad code snippets, it also is like
fundamentally linked to maybe all sorts
of like other undesirable behaviors and
properties.
There's sort of a different twist on the
nature nurture debate.
Yeah.
Because in that situation almost feels
as though you've imbued that particular
model with bad DNA, if you will. just
you know uh it's sort of fundamentally
an evil thing or a bad thing and then it
ends up with manifesting all sorts of
bad behavior in other domains. It's
really interesting.
Yeah, maybe or maybe these models kind
of understand right and wrong and if you
enhance the wrong then all sorts of
other behavior is interlin and expressed
but I don't know the way I think about
it like these models the models are just
like the functions of their training
data and uh these models are
trained on everything like all sorts of
like misbehavior as well. And you want
it trained on like um like incorrect
behavior as well because like otherwise
it won't know to refuse harmful requests
or to not do a certain set of things.
Do you have an intuition for why
different models have different base
models have different personalities?
Like for example, the the newest Claude
series like I think one of the models
maybe Opus or so on it is is you know
really cares about animal welfare for
example and the others don't. Like do
you have a sense for why these models
develop pretty distinct personalities?
I think it's just a function of how
they're trained and it's really really
hard to uh anticipate in in advance like
um yeah I don't know. I I I feel like uh
it might just be me, but like Cloud 4
Opus 2 is like enormously sickantic.
Like I'll kind of nudge it in one
direction and it'll just like agree with
me wholeheartedly and then nudge it in
the other direction like pose a counter
example and it'll just be like yes, I
was totally wrong before. Like nothing I
said earlier was was correct. And I just
think it's like really really hard. It's
like kind of goes back to like the
witchcraft almost of uh training an AI
model today where you're just like
throwing in training data into the model
and like whispering the incantation of
gradient descent and then like trying to
like get what you want out of it and
something pops out and then it like
really cares about animals. Oh, great.
Like that's that's great.
I'd love to talk about your research
results so far, you know, both at
Goodfire and in the broader mechan field
as a whole. maybe could you just give us
a a 30,000 foot fly overview of you know
mechan as a field how old is it what are
the key results so far what are the big
open questions
yeah so mechan as a field um I think
like maybe just like in this tradition
that we're building on uh I think there
were all sorts of studies like looking
inside neural networks all the way back
when we first you know designed neural
networks but I think once we um I think
the the way that the field kind of
thinks about itself like mechanistic
interpretability was started at like
OpenAI with Chris Ola and Nick Camarada
and a couple other folks who first put
out like this really big circuits thread
that posited like three things. One is
like there are features in neural
networks which are directions in latent
space that represent concepts that the
model uh uses to generate its response
circuits. Uh these are like features
that fire together to um create like
higher order concepts. The example that
they lay out is like you have a car
window detector and then a car like body
detector and then a car wheel detector
and then that's like a car circuit. And
uh universality is the third tenant like
uh similar circuits evolve in um
different neural networks. And so this
was like almost like the start of the
field of mechanistic uh interpretability
in in my mind. Um and so uh that really
kicked off a lot of uh you know
interesting research and results and
like the feature circuits paradigm and
uh I think like the main players um in
the field there's a lot of academic labs
that are doing great work like
Enthropic. So Chris Ola is one of the
co-founders of Enthropic and building a
great interpretability lab there and uh
Deepmind has an inter interpretability
lab as well. and then we were kind of
like the newer entrance on on the field
and on the stage. Um and uh I think
one of the other really key things to
have happened was um understanding and
uh mostly resolving superposition. So uh
superposition is this idea that like uh
each neuron is responsible for encoding
like multiple concepts and uh there are
more like concepts than dimensions in a
neural network. So you think about a
neural network as like a giant
compression algorithm. You're like
compressing like the entirety of the
internet into like a relatively small
number of parameters.
And so that means every single neuron
needs to encode or at least every single
layer of the model needs to encode more
concepts than it has like dimensions.
And so there's like this concept of
superposition where you have um concepts
represented as like near orthogonal
directions in in latent space um such
that you can represent all of these
concepts in in a model's latent space.
And so to resolve this, you have to
almost untangle and unscramble a neuron
such that it's responsible for like one
clean interpretable concept. And so um
it's like a group at Apollo Research um
led by like Lee Shy who's actually now
at at Goodfire first kind of pioneered
like sparse autoenccoders for for
language models and enthropic also like
really popularized this with their like
big paper like towards monoseity and
then right afterwards like scaling
monanticity showing that you can
essentially unscramble these neurons
into uh higher order concepts um
reliably and at scale with like
arbitrarily large neural networks. And I
think that was a really big moment for
interpretability where you can now in a
totally unsupervised way unscramble
neurons of a neural network uh to
understand them and get clean concepts.
Uh so the concepts aren't like totally
clean yet. You can't like edit them
super well. There's all sorts of
problems with this, but like it's almost
like a really big step forward for the
field such that like that we can do this
in an unsupervised way. and the
techniques and interpretability scale
which is really important.
Does that mean the superp position isn't
real or that you like the Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle you sort of
collapse it at a particular moment in
time to know that in this instance it
represents a particular
direction.
Uh so I think it means it was real like
neurons are responsible for you know
encoding multiple concepts such that u
once you unscramble them then you can do
really interesting things with like a
clean neuron. So the way that we do this
is like using an interpreter model train
on the activations of a base model and
then um now you have all sorts of
neurons in the interpreter model that
represent like theoretically clean
sparse concepts
in the interpreter model the original
model still has this characteristic of
superposition.
That's right.
Okay, got it. Thank you. And in the
interpreter model, you unscramble these
neurons and you associate these concepts
with the concepts in the base model that
you're trying to interpret and then you
can do interesting things with it.
Got it. Thank you.
Yeah, of course.
How solved of a problem is this then if
you've if you've already been able to
kind of disentangle the superp position
then haven't you already mapped out the
the mind so to speak of the neural net
and and what's what's ahead? I think
partially I think it's a partial mapping
and the technique has all sorts of all
sorts of flaws as well that we can
improve upon but I think like it gives
us the first step towards understanding
um these models uh especially going from
toy model to like actual network that
people care about um so we've done a
bunch of work recently on um R1 so it's
a 600 171 billion parameter mixture of
experts models. It's a it's a big boy
model. Uh and like the techniques scale
really nicely all the way up to that
point because you know it's just more AI
more training of an interpreter model.
So obviously I presume there's an
asmtote here to understanding because
the models are going to get more and
more complex over time and we're going
to beef them up.
Yeah. And so I'm guessing it's sort of,
you know, like the battle of Seephus at
some point, you know, this is a never-
ending pursuit, which is great. Um, is
that correct? Do you agree with that? in
some ways, but I also think that like
so the techniques that we've developed
work on toy models all the way up to
like yeah big network that's like more
capable and more intelligent and better
and I think like the techniques also
scale effectively with model
intelligence. So one part of our
pipeline is that for every single latent
concept in our interpreter model, we
associate that with um and try to we we
get another language model to reason
about like what that concept actually
represents in the base model. So this is
a concept called auto interpretability
which Nick Camarada who's at at Goodfire
now invented this technique at OpenAI um
uh pioneered and this technique because
it's a language model reasoning about
you know what a neuron represents scales
with the quality of the language model
so it actually gets better. So because
we use AI in order to understand AI like
the better that you know our our models
are like these analysis agents are at
interpreting like what's actually going
on the better we are able to understand
them.
Got it. And our interpreter model
techniques also it's just like if we
develop better interpreter models they
theoretically should translate to more
and more intelligent and larger and
larger networks because these are like
unsupervised scalable techniques and
that's like the paradigm in in AI
interpretability.
All right. When do you think you reach a
minimum threshold that makes you feel u
it's ready for a real world application?
Maybe we're there already.
I think we're there. Yeah. I think I
think um the first real world
applications are already out there and
uh yeah I think I think we're there on
like the the very very early
applications. Yeah.
Can you share more about this?
Yeah, I was being unnecessarily cryptic.
So um yeah, a couple of the partnerships
I'm I'm most excited about. Uh so we
worked with Arc Institute um like I I
mentioned a little bit earlier to
understand uh and interpret EVO 2 which
is their like kind of DNA uh foundation
model. So it's a sequencetosequence
model. So it like takes in um a sequence
of nucleotides and it predicts the next
nucleotide in a in a sequence. And our
theory is like this is a narrowly
superhuman model. So we really like to
work on narrowly superhuman models
because it can teach us something about
the world that humans don't really know.
And so the idea is like this model is
representing just an enormous amount
about the biological world in order to
generate the next and properly model the
next nucleotide in a sequence. So what
we did um was we sought to understand
like what does it actually know such
that it can model the world so so
effectively. Um so what we did was we
trained uh sparse autoenccoders on the
activations of this this model um
extracted all sorts of features that
were related to uh concepts that the
model like should know like kind of
normal biological concepts that we have
like really strong ground truth
annotations for. So these are like uh
tRNAs, RNAs, star coding sequences, like
all sorts of like biological concepts
that we have ground truth annotations
are we associated with this model. And
then the question is like okay now we
have all of these other features of the
model that we've extracted. What do they
mean? What what are they? They might
just be ways that the model is computing
and thinking or they could represent,
you know, like novel biological concepts
that the model's using to generate the
next, you know, nucleotide in a
sequence.
That's really interesting.
There was for a long time there was this
idea that we have a bunch of junk DNA.
You may have read about this and turns
out a lot of that DNA actually serves a
particular p purpose in a different part
of evolution or that they govern the
expression of other genes. And so, you
know, nature generally doesn't want to
harbor things that don't have value
because it's expensive,
you know, just from a biological system
point of view. So, that's super
interesting. I'm looking forward to the
results.
Yeah, totally. Totally. And, uh, I think
like hopefully using unsupervised AI
techniques like we can um, better
understand like what all these, you
know, portions of the DNA are actually
doing. Like maybe we can discover the
idea of junk DNA like faster or
or like or understand that like DNA is
not junk DNA like faster and or like
yeah just discover like totally novel
things that like genes are are doing and
expressing within us.
Yeah.
Where's the research as far as going
from understanding and mapping towards
editing? So for example being able to
reach in and you know change this weight
from here to there. Uh I'm I'm curious
if you all have any results there yet.
Yeah. Uh so we've done most of our
editing work on like language models and
image models. Like our our most recent
kind of release was a a um a paint with
Ember. Ember is our like kind of
foundational infrastructure for
interpretability. Um and uh what we were
able to do with this like image model
demo was targeted precise control over
an image model by by painting. So we
could extract latent concepts like a um
a dragon or dragon wings or an ocean or
a pyramid and then take these concepts
and directly intervene on like the
portion of a canvas that we want to
intervene on. So you can paint on a
dragon with wings and then add like a
crowd in the corner and add like a
pyramid and it's a it's a really fun
demo uh that's just like a kind of a joy
to play with. Um so it's it's out right
now. anybody can play with it. It's just
like paint.g goodfire.ai.
But we're able to I think reasonably
intervene uh in like certain situations
on on a model's latence and like steer
the model to do what we want. But uh we
haven't quite cracked like the idea of
direct precision surgical edits that
like create a new model that you want to
like use and doesn't have like any
unintended side effects. So, uh, that's
like still, you know, something that
we're pushing pushing on and and trying
to figure out.
Do you think that's where the field
ultimately goes or or do you think
people are focused on different parts of
the field?
I think there are many places where the
field is going to go and this is one of
them. uh like interpretability is almost
like such a general term that I again
I'm I'm biased but I think it's just
like governing and underlying like all
aspects of of AI. It's like um anytime
you prefer to take a white box approach
to doing something versus a blackbox
approach like interpretability can
probably help in the future. So
how do you select your training data?
Maybe you want to understand like
whether the training data is surprising
to the model before like putting it into
the model because then it can have like
the most impact on um on training. Yeah,
just like in every single part of like
the AI development stack, I think like
interpretability will will help and
change the way that we do things.
If AI foundational models go the way
that a lot of software has gone,
certainly infrastructure software where
much of it is open source or open
weight,
is there an opportunity for you to play
an invaluable role in judging the biases
or likely outcomes of using different
open weight models.
I think we could. Yeah. Um so there's
maybe like two two areas of research
that we're interested in that that
intersect with this idea. So um auditing
so like how do you take a model
understand like what's going on find
like problematic behavior and good
behavior hopefully get rid of the bad
behavior and enhance the good behavior.
So I think like as AI gets
um deployed in more and more mission
critical contexts like that becomes more
important.
Um
so uh and then also model diffing. So
it's like when you have two checkpoints
of a model like how do they differ from
each other and what's changed?
So the recent kind of like GPT40 like
was enormously sick ofantic for a period
of time. Uh just like telling just like
really gassing up the user like tell
them that they're doing great. You still
is.
Pat recently asked it who the most
handsome cribble board member was and it
was like definitely definitely Pat
Greedy. Still a bit sick of antic.
That's so good. That's so good. Uh yeah.
Um but yeah like model diffing like you
should be able to detect like uh how a
model has changed from checkpoint to
checkpoint like what surprising things
have happened that were um that are now
contained in the network that weren't
there before.
Why do you think it was so hard for
OpenAI to roll back to a less
psychopantic version of the model? And
in an ideal state of the world, is there
almost an, you know, a dial and a knob
that the OpenAI guys could tune of on a
scale of 0 to 100, how sick ofantic do
you want the model to be? Like, do you
think we can get there?
I don't know what questions you're
asking of the model, by the way, cuz I
never encountered this particular
problem.
Always does this with me. And then
sometimes it's brutal the other way. I
ask at the best AI podcast and it lists
20 things with no training data. I ask,
what about what about us? It's, oh, I
didn't want to I didn't want to give a
biased result. That's so funny. Well,
that's that's part of what users want,
right? They kind of want sick of fancy,
like, you know, um people want to hear
what they what they want to hear. So,
when you RL a model, I think
fundamentally you're going to get uh I
think it's just kind of a a symptom of
like RL. It's like you like this is what
users want. This is user preferences.
Along the way, you've dropped some names
and it seems as though most of them have
ended up at Goodfire. I presume there is
a a certain number of very talented
people in this field and you've unfairly
seem to gather them. Uh can you describe
a little bit more about your team, what
you've pulled together?
Yeah. Uh so I mean I I I think we have a
really fantastic team and that's what
we've been you know spending a lot of
our our time on the last year just kind
of like uh I think assembling a team of
you know world-class interpretability
experts that um really have a shot of
cracking this this problem. Um so it
starts with my you know like co-founders
you know I I had worked with uh Dan
Balsam our CTO for many years at my
previous company. Um and uh so he's our
CTO um and uh our chief scientist Tom
who founded the interpretability team at
Google DeepMind way back in the day and
uh yeah and just have assembled many of
like the early folks in the field. So uh
Tom um Nick Hamarada who is one who's
like working very closely with Chris Ola
who is generally considered like the
founder uh of of the field of meantur
and Nick like was on all of the original
like circuits papers and helped like you
know build everything out at open AI. uh
Lee Shy who is the first um who
pioneered like sparse autoenccoders on
language models and uh is now working on
some really interesting work in weights
based interpretability. So most
interpretability
uh techniques that have been deployed
into applications are in concept space
and activation space and he's he and his
group are working on um weight space
interpretability techniques. Um and
we've also just like kind of pulled in
scientists, senior scientists from other
fields who care a lot about uh uh
interpretability and just kind of have
realized that this is one of the most
important problems that we can can work
on. So uh Owen Lewis who was a senior
staff RS at uh Google um working on
coding agents um came over and uh is now
like leading a couple directions here
for us.
And you're recruiting, right?
And we're hiring. Yeah. scientists,
engineers. Uh I think it's like we are
hiring scientists and uh that is like
deeply important for the future of the
field, but also like it's hard to just
like um it's hard to overestimate just
how important like good engineering
skills are.
Incredible team.
Proud of the team. Yeah, for sure.
This seems like core functionality for
one of for any of these foundation model
companies to have. And as you mentioned,
you know, Cryola, was it OpenAI?
Anthropic OpenAI has has their
interpretability team as well. Um, how
do you think about the rationale for
having a standalone mechan uh research
company versus being inside one of the
labs that should care deeply about this?
I think um we can just take a really
different approach if we're independent.
I think the benefit of being independent
is we can think independently, push
things forward independently, and also
get like a broader view of the the
ecosystem. So usually if you're within a
lab, you're kind of doing
interpretability work on your own models
and like kind of pushing forward the the
field in in that way and you can make
incredible progress that way. But I I
really do think that like a unique third
party perspective uh is deeply necessary
in in in the field and I think like yeah
just given the team that we've assembled
like a lot of those folks like agree
with that and that's why they've joined
and uh also like gives us like um an
ability to work with lots of interesting
partners across different domains and we
can kind of unify those insights across
all these different domains. that that
teach us more about like the inner
workings of neural networks more
broadly. So we work across modalities
like genomics models, exomic models, uh
um image, video like language and also
across model architectures and I think
um all that just just helps.
Anthropic invested in in you all right?
Yeah, that's right.
Say more about that and how you partner
with them.
Yeah, so they um I think we were their
their first ever investment. uh they um
they put in a check in in our last round
and uh I think uh they just got they
just really care about interpretability
and really kind of see the future as we
do uh where um interpretability is just
like pretty critical um to to the
future. So Dario just published an essay
called like the urgency of
interpretability and um it's like one of
his like four essays that he has on his
site and uh just like talking about like
how he views this as almost like a race
um and we see that very similarly a race
to get interpretability prior to um you
know super intelligent uh really really
intelligent AI models. I just think it's
like deeply critical to be able to
understand these models before they're
before we have like in his words like a
country of geniuses in in a data center.
Do you think interpretability can help
us with open models and you know I think
some people have a fear that you know
models trained in in other countries
that may or may not be enemies of the
United States you know have different
nationalist properties. Can
interpretability help us understand and
and even modify those for the you know
the American variants of of some of
these models?
Yeah. Well, I definitely think so. Um I
also think it's like relatively easy to
uh like if you take like a DeepSeek
model for example. Um it's relatively
easy to just like tune it or add in more
training data to remove a lot of the
like uh propaganda in the model. Um, and
uh, but yeah, I think like
interpretability can help like
understand like what's actually inside
of the model and then also like change
it and edit it to um, to like serve
whatever end purpose that that you want.
How long do you think before you're
going to be pulled in as a witness in a
very important trial to try to
understand why a model did something in
particular? That's
a good question. I I think
uh,
few years,
who knows? Uh, I think it's really, you
know, uh, I mean, we're we're all
sitting in like the Bay Area right now,
but at this point, I'm I'm pretty AGI
pilled in that like, uh, I think AI AI
progress will be pretty fast and pretty
quick and transformative to society in
ways that are really difficult to
anticipate from from where we're sitting
right now. And so, um, yeah, I do think
that there will be a couple, you know,
like, um, big failure cases of AI
models. And whether it's me called in
or, you know, somebody at a big lab or
some, you know, uh, some other expert,
um, I think that we're going to want to,
uh, be able to explain a model's
outputs. Um yeah,
I agree with you on the rate of uh
development by the way and I think it's
um I'm sure you've read these articles.
The human brain doesn't intuit
compounding.
No.
And so, you know, I've even thought back
to 20 years ago uh when I first met the
self-driving car initiatives and
Sebastian's team from Stanford had won
the DARPA challenge. You know, you could
sort of see the glimmers of self-driving
cars. But even then, if you'd said, you
know, 20 years later, you would have a
self-driving car in San Francisco take
you around. I'm not sure it would have
been obvious that would be true and
maybe take a few took a few years longer
for the true visionaries. I think the
same is going to happen with AI. I don't
think we fully fathom what the world's
going to look like in 2030 or 2035.
Yeah. No, I couldn't agree more. And
it's just really hard to predict, you
know, like even if we feel like it's
going to happen really really quickly,
uh it's hard to predict all of the ways
that society will be transformed.
Good note to end on. Should we do some
rapid fire?
Some predictions.
Yeah. You need some predictions. These
all recorded, so we'll hold you to it.
Great. Yes. Yes.
Eric in 2035 will look back on how wrong
he is with all these predictions. Yeah.
Okay. Maybe first uh inference time
compute is vex important vector to scale
to scale uh models. Agree or disagree?
Uh mostly agree. I think it's one of the
important one of the things that we can
scale up on. Yeah.
What application category do you think
will break out next after code? I think
there will be a lot of enterprise
transformations that that happen. So
just like automating like manual routine
tasks that people are doing like many
many times a day
employment impact
from AI
vast
in in uh vast but uh once you cross a
chasm I think it happens quickly. Um I
think uh well my my last company was uh
helping um find early career jobs for
people and using AI to to automate that
and uh I think that that's where we're
going to feel the impact first.
Um
I agree. Recommended piece of content or
reading for for AI fans maybe spec
specifically in your field.
I think the the original circuits thread
that I was referencing a couple times
like that's still fantastic. What's u
either an AI app or maybe just an
experience that you've had with AI that
has blown you away recently? Something
that just took a breath away.
I think my like
one of those moments that you really
just like feel how fast AI is happening.
Like when I first uh played with 01 Pro,
like that was a a model that I just
really felt like was actually reasoning
about the world. and um seeing like the
kind of cross-domain transfer to I would
ask it a strategic question and it felt
like it would actually understand like
all the levers that I was considering
with the business and um considering
that like at least relatively
thoughtfully and being a thought partner
and that's both exciting because I now
have this model that I can talk to about
all sorts of critical problems but uh
and not just of course like trust it
blindly but um but also like it's like
wow Wow. How did it how did this happen?
You know,
interesting. One of the things I've
learned recently is that AI is still
struggling to understand humor.
And one of my partners, Andrew, actually
had this joke that uh humor is humans
way of showing off intelligence without
actually explicitly bragging. Um, and so
maybe there is a lot of embedded
intelligence in humor.
Do you think interpretability will help
us pinpoint
to figure out humor? Yeah. To figure out
why AIs don't have a sense of humor. or
will help them to develop it
perhaps. Who knows? Yeah. Uh I hope so.
Yeah. I can uh I think if I you know
wake up to a a model like telling me
jokes and Rolof's voice that would be uh
that
would be terrifying.
Okay, we'll close with one last question
on a prediction in your field. Uh do you
think we will ever reach the point where
we feel like we confidently understand
the features, the circuits, the
patterns, the weights of a neural net?
And if so, what year do you predict
we'll reach that point?
I think we can. I think that it might
not look like what you just said, like
the features, the circuits, the I think
that it requires maybe a
reconceptualization of what's actually
going on inside the model, like
a deeper, more fundamental understanding
of the units of computation of a model.
It's almost like discovering truths
about the universe or about like neural
nets in this case. Uh, but yes, I think
we're on track. I think we can do this
and I think we can do this
in and hold me to this in 2028. We're
going to figure it all out. Yeah.
Fantastic.
Yeah. Just a few years. I think I think
we're close.
Just in time for the LA Olympics.
Yeah, that's right.
Just in time for your next round of
funding.
I'm kidding. Eric, thank you so much for
doing this today. Ruf and I love the
conversation.
Thank you.
It was a pleasure. Yeah. So much fun.
Thanks for having me.
[Music]